README.md, before:

# Driftless

[![Build Status](https://github.com/driftless-hq/driftless/workflows/CI/badge.svg)](https://github.com/driftless-hq/driftless/actions)
[![Documentation](https://img.shields.io/badge/docs-generated-blue)](https://driftless-hq.github.io/driftless/)

Streamlined system configuration, inventory, and monitoring agent with Ansible-like configuration operations, plus facts collection and log management.

## Documentation

- **[Complete Documentation](https://driftless-hq.github.io/driftless/)** - Full documentation on GitHub Pages
- **[Documentation Source](docs/)** - Markdown documentation in the repository
- **[API Documentation](https://driftless-hq.github.io/driftless/api/driftless/)** - Rust API documentation

## Quick Start

```bash
# Install
cargo install driftless

# Create configuration
mkdir -p ~/.config/driftless/config

# Run
driftless apply
```

For detailed installation instructions, configuration examples, and comprehensive guides, see the [full documentation](https://driftless-hq.github.io/driftless/).

## License

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.

Commit message:

Add experimental note to docs

README.md, after:

# Driftless

[![Build Status](https://github.com/driftless-hq/driftless/workflows/CI/badge.svg)](https://github.com/driftless-hq/driftless/actions)
[![Documentation](https://img.shields.io/badge/docs-generated-blue)](https://driftless-hq.github.io/driftless/)

> **Warning:** This is an experimental, AI-assisted project. Bugs and other shortcomings are expected and should be reported as GitHub Issues. PRs are welcome!

Streamlined system configuration, inventory, and monitoring agent with Ansible-like configuration operations, plus facts collection and log management.

## Documentation

- **[Complete Documentation](https://driftless-hq.github.io/driftless/)** - Full documentation on GitHub Pages
- **[Documentation Source](docs/)** - Markdown documentation in the repository
- **[API Documentation](https://driftless-hq.github.io/driftless/api/driftless/)** - Rust API documentation

## Quick Start

```bash
# Install
cargo install driftless

# Create configuration
mkdir -p ~/.config/driftless/config

# Run
driftless apply
```

For detailed installation instructions, configuration examples, and comprehensive guides, see the [full documentation](https://driftless-hq.github.io/driftless/).

## License

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0.
