docs/DESIGN.md, before:

# Driftless (Config Management)

## Goals
- Streamlined system configuration, inventory, and monitoring agent
- Built for GitOps using a single repository of truth
- Tiny, efficient, and memory-safe executable (via Rust)

## Features
- Configuration management
	- Applies declarative system configs idempotently
	- Requires list of configuration tasks
	- Writes audit/diff logs to a local directory (i.e. NFS), HTTP endpoint, or S3 bucket
	- Alternative to Ansible/Chef/Puppet
	- Crates: `git2 nix reqwest rust-s3 serde`
- Metrics gathering
	- Gather host metrics (CPU, mem, disk, etc)
	- Requires list of metrics to collect, poll interval, and thresholds
	- Export metrics via `/metrics` endpoint or push to S3 bucket
	- Alternative to Prometheus Node Exporter
	- Crates: `prometheus rust-s3 sysinfo`
- Log collection
	- Tails and forwards logs
	- Requires list of paths to tail and filters/parsers to use
	- Writes logs to local directory (i.e. NFS), S3 bucket, syslog, or HTTP (i.e. ELK stack)
	- Alternative to FileBeat
	- Crates: `flate2 reqwest rust-s3`
- Secrets management
	- Remove secrets from configuration using variable substitution
	- Reads secrets from environment variables and `env` files outside input directory
	- Crates: `secret_vault`

## Design details
- Runs as a CLI
- Uses the given directory of configuration files as input (i.e. cloned Git repo)
- Configuration files use an JSON, TOML, or YAML syntax (auto-detect file extension)
- Configuration file schemas include:
	- `apply`: Idempotent system configuration tasks
	- `facts`: Facts, metrics, and other information gathering tasks
	- `logs`: Log file tailing and forwarding tasks
- Default configuration directory: `~/.config/driftless/config`
- Secrets passed via environment variables or `~/.config/driftless/env`
- Sub-command names mirror file schemas (i.e. `apply`, `facts`, `logs`) for running tasks
	- The `apply` sub-command should include a `--dry-run` flag or similar to only output diffs
- Additional `agent` sub-command activates agent mode
	- Gathers built-in facts
	- If configured, starts Prometheus metrics endpoint (i.e. `0.0.0.0:8000/metrics)
	- Starts an event loop
		- Reads configuration files from directory
		- Gathers configured additional facts and metrics at requested interval
		- Starts collecting and forwarding configured log files
		- Runs apply tasks at requested interval

## Potential Future Enhancements
- Remote secrets provider support (AWS, GCP, Vault/OpenBao, etc)
- Distributed scheduling/task management
- Inventory reporting (hardware/software)
- Reusable modules
- Extensible with plugins via `wasmtime` crate
- Plugin registry and download manager

## TODO
- Implement other missing features such as template composition (include/import) and custom extensions support. Ensure compatibility with Ansible and comprehensive documentation and tests.
- Review the codebase for usage of Rust best-practices and guidelines
- Review the codebase for safety, security, and production-readiness
- Ensure comprehensive test coverage

Commit message:

feat(template): implement template composition and custom extensions support with documentation updates

docs/DESIGN.md, after:

# Driftless (Config Management)

## Goals
- Streamlined system configuration, inventory, and monitoring agent
- Built for GitOps using a single repository of truth
- Tiny, efficient, and memory-safe executable (via Rust)

## Features
- Configuration management
	- Applies declarative system configs idempotently
	- Requires list of configuration tasks
	- Writes audit/diff logs to a local directory (i.e. NFS), HTTP endpoint, or S3 bucket
	- Alternative to Ansible/Chef/Puppet
	- Crates: `git2 nix reqwest rust-s3 serde`
- Metrics gathering
	- Gather host metrics (CPU, mem, disk, etc)
	- Requires list of metrics to collect, poll interval, and thresholds
	- Export metrics via `/metrics` endpoint or push to S3 bucket
	- Alternative to Prometheus Node Exporter
	- Crates: `prometheus rust-s3 sysinfo`
- Log collection
	- Tails and forwards logs
	- Requires list of paths to tail and filters/parsers to use
	- Writes logs to local directory (i.e. NFS), S3 bucket, syslog, or HTTP (i.e. ELK stack)
	- Alternative to FileBeat
	- Crates: `flate2 reqwest rust-s3`
- Secrets management
	- Remove secrets from configuration using variable substitution
	- Reads secrets from environment variables and `env` files outside input directory
	- Crates: `secret_vault`

## Design details
- Runs as a CLI
- Uses the given directory of configuration files as input (i.e. cloned Git repo)
- Configuration files use an JSON, TOML, or YAML syntax (auto-detect file extension)
- Configuration file schemas include:
	- `apply`: Idempotent system configuration tasks
	- `facts`: Facts, metrics, and other information gathering tasks
	- `logs`: Log file tailing and forwarding tasks
- Default configuration directory: `~/.config/driftless/config`
- Secrets passed via environment variables or `~/.config/driftless/env`
- Sub-command names mirror file schemas (i.e. `apply`, `facts`, `logs`) for running tasks
	- The `apply` sub-command should include a `--dry-run` flag or similar to only output diffs
- Additional `agent` sub-command activates agent mode
	- Gathers built-in facts
	- If configured, starts Prometheus metrics endpoint (i.e. `0.0.0.0:8000/metrics)
	- Starts an event loop
		- Reads configuration files from directory
		- Gathers configured additional facts and metrics at requested interval
		- Starts collecting and forwarding configured log files
		- Runs apply tasks at requested interval

## Potential Future Enhancements
- Remote secrets provider support (AWS, GCP, Vault/OpenBao, etc)
- Distributed scheduling/task management
- Inventory reporting (hardware/software)
- Reusable modules
- Extensible with plugins via `wasmtime` crate
- Plugin registry and download manager

## TODO
- Now that the `apply` tasks are complete, look at the `facts` and `logs` and determine what task types should exist. Create task prompts in the TODO list that implements these task types with comprehensive documentation and tests in managable pieces.
- Create task prompts in the TODO list that create, in managable pieces, an extensions/plugins system via the `wasmtime` crate that can create and register task types and template filters and functions.
- Review the codebase for usage of Rust best-practices and guidelines
- Review the codebase for safety, security, and production-readiness
- Ensure comprehensive test coverage
